.TH "upstate" "1"
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" * disable hyphenation
.nh
.\" * disable justification (adjust text to left margin only)
.ad l
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "NAME"
upstate -- Prints a machine and process status report
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.sp
.nf
\fBupstate\fR [options]
.fi
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.sp
Prints a report containing machine and process metrics. Also checks for the
existence of a number of configured processes. A short output example:
.sp
.nf
    loadavg:  0.06 0.04 0.00             up 264 days * 192 processes * 1 cores
    memory:   64 MB (6.6%) free          491 MB rss * 426 MB cache * 981 MB total
    storage:  16.0 GB (66.6%) free       6.8 GB used * 24.1 GB total * on /
    * system/cron [297]                  1 MB rss * up 264 days * cpu 00:01:38
    * ntp [1402230]                      2 MB rss * up 159 days * cpu 00:34:48
    * sshd [1975344]                     23 MB rss * up 108 days * cpu 00:00:00
.fi
.sp
Information is read from the \fB/proc\fR filesystem or similar for other
operating systems.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.sp
\fB--no-summary\fR
.RS 4
Exclude machine status from output.
.RE
\fB--no-services\fR
.RS 4
Exclude services list from output.
.RE
\fB--limited\fR
.RS 4
Report excludes optional/hidden processes.
.RE
\fB--complete\fR
.RS 4
Report includes all processes (default).
.RE
\fB--sort=<key>\fR
.RS 4
Sort services by \fBcpu\fR, \fBrss\fR, or \fBuptime\fR.
.RE
\fB--limit=<n>\fR
.RS 4
Limit the number of services shown.
.RE
\fB--json\fR
.RS 4
Prints the report in JSON output format.
.RE
.SH "CONFIGURATION"
.sp
The processes to check are configured in a single \fBupstate.toml\fR file or an
\fBupstate.toml.d\fR directory with partial config files. These files are located
based on the binary location or the current working dir. As an alternative
the \fBUPSTATE_CONF\fR environment variable may point to either a file or
directory with configuration.

The configuration search order is:

.nf
    1. etc/upstate.toml
    2. etc/upstate.conf  (legacy format)
    3. etc/upstate.toml.d/  (lexical order)
    4. etc/upstate.conf.d/  (legacy format, lexical order)
.fi

The first matching location is used. If both \fBetc/upstate.toml.d/\fR and
\fBetc/upstate.conf.d/\fR exist, only the TOML directory is read.
.SS "TOML Format"
The TOML configuration files support a \fB[global]\fR section for default
settings and a \fB[[services]]\fR array of tables for service definitions.
.sp
The \fB[global]\fR section configures default behavior and can be overridden
via command-line options. All fields are optional:

.nf
    [global]
    format = "text"                # output format: text or json (default: text)
    display_summary = "all"        # show machine status: none or all (default: all)
    display_services = "all"       # show services: none, required, or all (default: all)
    sort = "cpu"                   # sort services by: cpu, rss, or uptime (default: none)
    limit = 20                     # max number of services shown (default: unlimited)
.fi

Each service has a \fBname\fR and optionally a \fBpidfile\fR, \fBcommand\fR,
\fBrequired\fR, or \fBmultiple\fR field:

.nf
    [[services]]
    name = "sshd"                  # service name (used in output)
    pidfile = "/var/run/sshd.pid"  # path to PID file (optional)

    [[services]]
    name = "cron"
    pidfile = "/var/run/crond.pid"
    required = false               # service is optional (default: true)

    [[services]]
    name = "my-service"
    command = "my-daemon --flag"   # match by command regex (optional)
    required = false               # service is optional
    multiple = true                # allow multiple matches (default: false)
.fi

Either \fBpidfile\fR or \fBcommand\fR may be omitted. If both are present,
the PID file is checked first and the command is used as fallback.
.SS "Legacy Format"
The legacy configuration files should contain one line per process. Comment or
blank lines are ignored. Each line contains the process or service name, pid
file and an optional command-line argument to match:

.nf
    cron            /var/run/crond.pid
    sshd            /var/run/sshd.pid
    local           - local-command-match
    -rsyslog        /var/run/rsyslogd.pid
.fi

Processes with a leading \fB-\fR character in the name are optional. These
are omitted in \fB--limited\fR report and always ignored if missing.

Processes with a leading \fB+\fR character in the name may match multiple
processes (at least one).

Processes with a leading \fB*\fR character in the name are optional, but
may match multiple processes. These are omitted in \fB--limited\fR report
and always ignored if missing.

A pid file specified as \fB-\fR forces process lookup by either name or
command-line match. Process lookup is also made in a similar way if the pid
file didn't exist or didn't match a running process.
.SH "FILES"
.sp
.B /etc/upstate.toml
.RS 4
Service configuration file in TOML format.
.RE
.B /etc/upstate.conf
.RS 4
Legacy service configuration file with one line per service.
.RE
.B /etc/upstate.toml.d/
.RS 4
Directory containing TOML service configuration files (lexical order).
.RE
.B /etc/upstate.conf.d/
.RS 4
Directory containing legacy service configuration files (lexical order).
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.sp
\fBdf\fR(1), \fBps\fR(1), \fBpgrep\fR(1), \fBpstree\fR(1), \fBproc\fR(5)
